[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
CASEY RODRIGUEZ: So let's
continue our discussion
of sequences of functions.
So we had two different
notions of convergence
of sequences of functions.
So the first notion was
pointwise convergence.
So we have a sequence
of functions,
f n from some set S to R,
another function, fixed
function f from S
to R. And then we
say f n converges to f
pointwise if for every x in S,
the sequence of real
numbers converges to f of x.
So if for all x and
S, the limit as n
goes to infinity of f
n of x equals f of x.
So I take an x out of
S, stick it into f n.
So now I get a sequence
of real numbers.
And I should get f of x
as n goes to infinity.
And then we introduced
the stronger notion
of convergence of functions,
which was the following--
so we have a sequence going from
S to R, function from S to R,
then we said f n converges to
f uniformly on S if somehow,
across the entire set,
f n gets close to f.
So here, this statement says if
for each fixed x, eventually,
f n of x-- so f n
evaluated at that point--
is close to f of x, f
evaluated at that point.
But uniform convergence
says f n is close to f
across the entire set.
So if for all epsilon positive,
there exists natural number
M so that for all n bigger than
or equal to M, for all x in S,
f n of x minus f of x
is less than epsilon.
Now, if you write out what this
means in terms of epsilon M--
remember, this is a limit, so
this is a limit of sequences,
so this means something in
terms of epsilons and M's--
this would say for all x in
S, for all epsilon positive,
there exists an M, so on.
So the x appears at the
front of this definition,
while here for
uniform convergence,
it appears at the end.
That is not just a kind
of meaningless difference
in the way you write
the definition,
meaning this is a stronger
statement than if the x is
appearing here.
So what am I going on about?
So first off, we
proved last time
that if I have a
sequence of functions,
again from some subset S to R,
converging to f uniformly, then
this implies f n
convergence to f pointwise.
But now, what I'm
going to prove is
that in fact,
uniform convergence
is something stronger than
pointwise convergence.
In other words, this
is a one-way street.
Pointwise convergence does
not imply uniform convergence.
And we were just going to look
at a very specific example,
which I was going to
state as a theorem, which
is the following--
let f n of x be x to the n.
And now we're looking on
the unit interval, 0, 1.
And let f the function that
is 0 if x is in 0, 1, 1
if x equals 1.
So first off, let
me from last time--
or you can even just check by
looking at the form of f n--
that f n converges
to f pointwise.
If I take x in this interval
here, so not equal to 1,
then x is strictly less than 1.
And if I raise it to a
high enough power over
and over again, that's
converging to 0.
So it converges to f of x, 0.
Now at 1, I just get 1, and
that clearly converges to 1.
So f n converges to f pointwise.
And so the claim is that
for all b between 0 and 1,
f n converges to f.
And I guess I could include 0.
That would just be
looking at one point
and not very interesting, but
f n converges to f uniformly.
And the second is f n does
not converge to f uniformly
on the whole interval, however.
So maybe it's best to
again draw this picture
that you're supposed
to think about when it
comes to uniform convergence.
So we have the
limiting function, f.
And then we draw a little
epsilon-sized collar
around the function f.
And then uniform convergence--
so this is f--
uniform convergence says that
as long as I go far enough out,
the graph of f n should be
within this little epsilon
collar, so that f n is
getting close to f uniformly
across the entire set.
So number 2 will
give us a chance
to negate this definition of
uniform convergence, which like
I said, you should always--
so we're actually
doing two things here.
We're giving an example
of uniform convergence,
and also a sequence of functions
which does not converge
uniformly to this function.
So we're doing both an
example and non-example,
which is the best thing to
do for a new definition.
So for the proof of 1, let's
prove uniform convergence.
So let b be in 0, 1.
Then the limit as n goes
to infinity of b to the n
is 0, which implies--
so now I'm getting
ahead of myself.
Don't write that yet.
So now we want to prove uniform
convergence of f n to f on--
I didn't finish this statement,
f n to f uniformly on b.
So I have uniform convergence
on any smaller interval
other than 0, 1.
Sorry about that if that
looked a little weird.
So then b n converges to
0 as n goes to infinity.
And now we want to prove that
f n converges to f uniformly
on this interval 0, b.
So let epsilon be positive.
We now have to find an M
so that f n is close to 0
because f is 0 on
such an interval.
Now, since b to the
n converges to 0,
there exists natural
number M such
that for all n bigger than
or equal to M, b to the n
is less than epsilon.
Then for all n bigger than
or equal to M, we get--
and also for all x--
0, b, we get that f
n of x minus f of x--
b is less than 1, so when I
stick it into f, I just get 0.
This is equal to
x to the n minus 0
in absolute value
is just x to the n
because we're looking
at non-negative x.
And now x is in
this interval 0, b,
so it's less than or equal to b.
So x to the n is
going to be less than
or equal to b to the n, and
this is less than epsilon.
So just as when we looked
at uniform continuity
of a function, it was a
statement like, for all epsilon
there exists a delta which
just depends on, basically,
the epsilon and the function.
Now for uniform convergence,
it looks kind of like pointwise
convergence, except
now for every epsilon
you can find an M which does
not depend on the point x.
So for every epsilon,
you can find an M
depending only on epsilon, and
maybe the function little f.
But that doesn't depend on x.
This n here that I
chose, M, depended only
on b, not the point x, which I
have to stick into this here.
So now, let's prove number 2.
So first off, let's negate
the definition so that we
know what we're talking about.
So f n does not converge
to f uniformly on a set S
if there exists a bad--
so every "for all"
becomes a "there exists.
So if there exists some bad
epsilon 0 positive so that
for all M, a natural number,
there exists n bigger than
or equal to M, and
there exists an x in S
so that f n of x minus f of x is
bigger than or equal to epsilon
0.
So this is the negation.
But why should we not be
surprised that f n does not
converge to f uniformly on 0,
1, if you believe this picture?
So let's look at
what's going on here.
So let me draw,
now, the graph of f.
And let's say I take
epsilon to be 1/4, say.
Now this is what my little
epsilon neighborhood of f
looks like or epsilon tube, or
for epsilon equals 1/4, say.
It's a tube around
0 up to x equals 1,
and then it's a
little area around 1.
And now if I were to have
uniform convergence, then as
long as n is very large, f
n has to be within this area
that I have here.
So in fact, let me shade it in.
So for f n large, it has
to be within this region
that I'm coloring in.
But now, what do we
know about x to the n?
Well, it starts at
0, and ends at 1,
and looks something like
that, which means here,
always, it leaves this epsilon
tube around f, this epsilon
collar, I guess.
f n leaves the
shaded area, which
is where it's supposed to stay.
So I hope this intuitive
explanation is clear,
and why it shouldn't be too
big of a surprise that f
n does not converge to
f uniformly on 0, 1.
We'll see another
reason in a little bit
why it's impossible
for f n to converge
to f uniformly when we
talk about the interchange
of limits.
But just using
the definition, we
can prove that f n does not
converge to f uniformly.
So the negation is that there
exists a bad epsilon 0 so
that we have all of this.
So the point is
to choose epsilon
so that this never
intersects with this epsilon
neighborhood of the
function down here,
never intersects
with this epsilon
neighborhood of just the
point x equals 1, y equals 1.
So let's choose
epsilon 0 to be 1/4.
So now we have to prove for
all n, there exists an n.
So let M be a natural number.
Choose n to be M. And choose
x to be, let's say, 1 over 4
to the 1 over M.
Now, this is a
number less than 1.
So its n-th root is less
than 1 and also positive.
Then this f of x
equals 0, and f sub M
of this x, which is just
1 over 4 to the 1 over M,
now raised to the
M-th power, 1 over 4,
which implies that f sub M of
x minus f of x is equal 1/4,
which equals epsilon 0.
Or I guess if you like,
you can write bigger
than or equal to epsilon 0.
So basically, if
you choose any-- so
there was nothing special
about epsilon 0 being 1/4.
If you choose anything
less than 1, that would do
You can check that.
If I chose 1/2 here, I could
then choose this point x
where f M is far away from
f of x to be 1 over 1/2,
1/2 to the 1 over
M, just as long
as I don't choose epsilon
0 to be equal to 1.
So we have that example.
And we had another
sequence of functions
we had looked at last time,
which were these functions that
look like tents.
I don't know why I'm making
this axis bigger when
it should be the other one.
So there's 1, 1 over n, 1
over 2n, then way up here 2n,
so at this point.
And then it's piecewise linear.
So then it's just a
straight line down to here.
I'm not going to write
down exactly the equation
for each piece, and then 0 to 1.
So this is f n.
And last time, we proved
that f n converges
to the function 0 pointwise.
But it does not
converge uniformly to 0.
Again, what's the point?
The point here is that if I
were to draw a little epsilon
collar around the function 0, it
would look something like this.
And f n would have to be
within this little strip
for all n sufficiently large.
But f n is getting
taller and taller,
so it always leaves any strip
that I put around the function
0.
So f n does not
convert to 0 uniformly.
We can make a proof
out of that, though.
So f n does not converge
to 0 uniformly on--
so I should always tell you
where I'm talking about.
And this should-- on 0, 1.
So why not?
Well, we can take any
epsilon 0, really.
So let's choose
epsilon 0 to be 1.
Let M be a natural number.
So we should find an n and
a x so that this inequality
is satisfied.
So let's choose n to be
M, x to be 1 over 2M,
at this point where I peak.
Then f of M of x minus f of x--
f here is just 0.
The limiting function is 0,
so let me not even put f,
let me put this 0.
This equals f M of 1
over 2M, which equals 2M.
And this is
certainly bigger than
or equal to 1,
which is epsilon 0.
Now in a little bit, I'll give
you a whole host of examples--
it seems like I've only given
you maybe one example up
to this point--
of functions which converge
uniformly to something.
But in a minute, I'll give
you a very useful test
to decide when a series
involving functions
converges uniformly.
But before we get to that, let's
revisit these three questions
that we asked in
the last lecture
in the context of
power series, but now
in this more general setting
of convergence of functions.
So now what I'm talking
about-- and this is really--
although what I'm about to
say may sound a bit alarming,
that we're now in essentially
the last week of the class
and we're really getting to the
first real part of analysis.
So I was talking with a
professor from Duke one time,
and he made this funny
observation that somehow
in math-- and I think
this is not just math,
but this is a lot of
science-based classes--
are taught, if you
were to translate it
into studying a book, it's
like you spend a year studying
introductions to a
book, and then you
spend a year studying
middle parts of books,
and then you spend
another year studying
the last parts of books.
So now here, we're
starting to get
into the middle part of the book
of analysis, not the textbook.
We're at the end of
that, but at least
in the grand scheme
of things, which
is the interchange of limits.
You have two limiting processes
that you want to interchange.
In analysis, first God created
the limit, and then man asked,
can we interchange limits?
And so what do I mean by that?
This is not always
a thing you can do.
And this is at the
very heart of analysis
is when can we
interchange limits.
So let me give you
the simplest example.
Let's say we have
the following limit--
so I take the limit as k
goes to infinity of the limit
as n goes to infinity of
n over k, n over k plus 1.
So that's just a sequence
depending on n and k.
Now, as n goes to
infinity, what do I get?
This is just equal to--
I can multiply the bottom
by k to get rid of this one.
So then I just get
n over n plus k.
And remember, k is fixed.
And then I take the limit
as n goes to infinity.
So I get 1.
So I'm taking the
limit as k goes
to infinity of this expression.
Now for each k, when I take the
limit as n goes to infinity,
I get 1.
So I get 1 there.
Now, what happens if I
interchange the limit,
and now look at the limit as n
goes to infinity of the limit
as k goes to infinity of
n over k, n over k plus 1?
Well, now as k goes to
infinity for each n--
so remember, I'm
taking the limit
as n goes to infinity of this
expression, which is formerly
this expression with the
limits interchanged--
this is equal to 0
over 0 plus 1 equals 0.
And these two do not
equal each other.
So it's not always the case
that you can interchange limits.
That's the simple fact of life.
And to be able to make
certain statements,
do certain
computations, you need
to be able to
interchange limits.
And what kind of limits?
Maybe taking an infinite
sum and integrating,
or like we stated
in the beginning,
power series are, in a
sense, a certain limit.
They're a limit of
partial sums of--
they're a limit of polynomials.
And then let's say
differentiation--
that's a limit.
So a natural question,
like we said last time is,
is the derivative of this
infinite sum the infinite sum
of the derivative?
Those are two limiting
processes which we're
asking can we interchange.
So the three questions,
again, that I
asked in terms of
power series, I'm
going to now frame again
in this general setting.
So if f n, S to R, f from S
to R, and f n converges to f--
maybe pointwise or
uniformly, so let's
leave this open ended for now
because these are the only two
notions we have of convergence--
and let me make--
so suppose f n is from
S to R, f is S to R,
and f n converges to f
pointwise or uniformly,
and this sentence is
not written very well,
and f n is continuous for
all n, then is f continuous?
So suppose we have a sequence of
continuous functions converging
to another function f, either
pointwise or uniformly.
Is the limiting
function continuous?
And I'll explain
it in a minute why
this is a limiting,
kind of asking
can we interchange two limits.
Second question is
suppose f n from a, b to R
is differentiable for
all n, f from a, b to R,
and we have that f
n converges to f--
either pointwise
or uniform, we're
leaving this open
ended for now--
and the derivatives also
converge, say to some function
g, then is f differentiable?
And is the limit
of the derivatives
equal to the derivative
of the limit?
And then the last question-- so
this is the third main limiting
process we've seen in this
class, which is integration--
suppose f n is a sequence
of continuous functions,
f is a continuous
function, and f n converges
to f-- again, maybe either
pointwise or uniformly,
we're leaving this
open ended for now.
Does limit of the
integrals equal
the integral of the limit?
Now again, I want you to--
it's really, I guess,
more clear here,
the fact that we're asking
about interchanging two limits.
So here, we have
this integration
is just a symbol for taking
this limiting process,
where you take a sequence
of partitions of a, b
with norm converging to 0, then
the integral from a to b of f
n-- this is defined to be
this limit of Riemann sums.
So this is a limiting
process here,
although I'm writing it
with this simple notation.
So I'm asking it,
can I take this limit
as n goes to infinity?
And can I interchange it
with this limiting process?
Now, for continuity, it's
maybe a little more hidden
on what's the
interchange of limits
that you're really looking at.
So it looks more like this.
So remember, for 1, we're
asking suppose x is in set S,
x n is a sequence converging
to x, then basically,
can we do this?
Now I would like to show that
f of x is equal to the limit
as n goes to infinity
of f of x sub n.
So let me actually make this
an m, and use two different--
let's use a k.
So if I compute limit as k goes
to infinity of f of x sub k,
would like to show
that equals f of x
if I'm trying to show that
the limit is continuous,
assuming the functions that are
converging to f are continuous.
If I look at the limit
as k goes to infinity,
then I'm tempted to do
the following-- that this
is equal to the limit as k goes
to infinity of the limit as n
goes to infinity of
f n of x, assuming
either pointwise convergence
or uniform convergence, x k.
And now, if I'm just being
a little bit careless,
I interchange limits and
write this as the limit
as n goes to infinity of the
limit as k goes to infinity.
So here is where I'm asking,
can I interchange limits?
Again, this is not
a proof, this is
discussion on what is
the interchange of limits
that I'm looking at
for question number 1.
Question number 3 is more clear.
And then for this,
once I've done this,
differentiability will
be a little bit clearer
on what is the interchange
of limits I'm looking at.
So let's say I was just
doing whatever I like
and going through this.
Then I would interchange
these limits.
And since each of these
f n's are continuous,
then the limit as k goes to
infinity of f n of x sub k,
and x sub k converges to x,
this just gives me f n of x.
And so since f n, again,
converges to f in some sense,
this should give me f of x.
So what I'm asking
is, was all this OK?
Because at some point, at
this point in particular,
I had to interchange a limit.
And we've just seen that
we can't always do that.
We can't always interchange
limits and get the same thing.
Here, we got 1.
When we interchanged
the limit, we got 0.
So it's not always the case
that I can interchange limits.
This equality between this
limit and the interchanged limit
is the big question mark.
So that's the whole basis
for question number 1.
So I hope that discussion
was clear enough.
Now, the answer to
these three questions
is, in fact, yes, but only
for uniform convergence.
If the convergence-- and this
is the mode of convergence
we must have so that the
answer to all of these three
questions, which we'll state and
prove as theorems, is correct.
Now the natural
question is, what
if we have a weaker hypothesis?
Namely, what if we only
assume pointwise convergence?
Is the answer to any
of these questions yes?
And, well, no.
So the answer to all
three of these questions
is no if we only assume
pointwise convergence.
So let's go through
an example showing
that each of these
three questions
is no if we only assume
pointwise convergence.
So let's look at an
example showing 1
is no if we only assume
pointwise convergence.
And we basically already
have it on the board.
Take f n of x to be x to
the n on 0, 1, x is in--
then each of these
functions, and for all n,
f n is a continuous
function on 0, 1,
f n converges to f pointwise.
But f itself is not
continuous function.
So this provides an example
of a sequence of functions
which converges pointwise
to a function which
is not continuous.
Again, what I was saying
there in the answer
is that if I have a
sequence of functions which
converges uniformly
to a function f,
then that function
is continuous.
Here, if we only assume
pointwise convergence,
we may not get a continuous
function in the end.
And this is what
this example shows--
f n of x equals x to the n.
These are all
continuous functions.
They converge to
a function which
is not continuous pointwise.
I'll say something
else in a minute.
So let's look at example 2 now.
Basically, we take the
previous example and kind
of integrate it to get
an example of a sequence
of functions that converges,
and its derivative converges
pointwise.
2, take f n of x to be x
to the n over n on 0, 1.
Then a couple of things--
f n converges to 0.
f n prime converges
to the function
f, which is the same
function from here.
So let me actually make this g.
And these are
pointwise, so I have
a sequence of
differentiable functions
that converge
pointwise to something.
And the derivatives
also converge
pointwise to something.
Let's call f equals 0, but
g is not equal to f prime.
The derivative of f,
the constant function 0,
which is 0.
g is equal to this
function, which
is 0 if x is in 0, 1 and
1 if x is equal to 1.
So here, we see that the
derivative of the limit
is not the limit
of the derivatives,
if we only assume pointwise
convergence of the functions.
Now, the last example
showing that 3 does not
hold if we only assume
pointwise convergence
is also on the board.
It's the whole point
of this one up there.
So let's go on the next board.
So here, f n from 0 to 1 to R
is this tent function, 1 over n,
1 over 2n, 2n.
It's just piecewise linear.
So it's 0 from 1 over n
to 1, and it goes up to 1
over 2n, 2n, and then
back down to the origin.
And so we know that f n
converges to 0 pointwise.
Now, the integral
of 0 is just 0.
Let's look at the integral
of f n from 0 to 1.
The integral of 0, 1 of f n--
now if we were
all together, this
would be the point where I stop
and ask if anybody can remember
the area of a triangle,
even though we're
in this advanced analysis class.
But I don't get to ask you that.
I get to just ask myself
that and I know the answer
because I prepared and
only because of that.
This is 1/2 base
times the height.
So remember, the
integral is an area.
And I could write
down the formula
of what this function is
and actually integrate it
out using the fundamental
theorem of calculus,
but just go with me on this--
that the integral of f n is just
the area of this triangle that
has base starting at 0
and going to 1 over n,
and it peaks at 2n.
So the base is 1 over n.
The height is 2n.
So this equals 1 for all n.
See, this is why I
was making it peak.
So the integral from 0 to 1,
which is just 1 for all n,
does not converge to the
integral of the limit.
So in this case, the
limit of the integrals
is not the integral
of the limit.
And what's the reason?
Because we only have
pointwise convergence.
Like I said a minute ago, the
answer is yes to all three
of these questions if the
convergence is uniform.
And what these
three examples are
supposed to show
you is the answer
is no if I only assume pointwise
convergence, the weaker
notion of convergence.
So let's now prove
some theorems.
So this first theorem
addresses question 1.
Suppose f n from S to R, f
from S to R, f n is continuous,
meaning it's continuous at
every point in S for all n,
and f n convergence to
f uniformly on S. Then
the conclusion is
that f is continuous.
So the proof-- we've done
several proofs like this
before but for some
reason, at least I
see in textbooks for this
proof, they always refer to it
as an epsilon over 3 argument.
And then it's the
last time they call
it an epsilon over 3 argument.
So we have to show f is
continuous at every point in S.
So let c be a point in S.
Let epsilon be positive.
We have to find delta
so that for all x
minus c less than delta
in absolute value,
f of x minus f of c
is less than epsilon.
And what we're going to
do is we're basically
going to replace f by some
f m for m large enough.
And the fact that we
have uniform convergence
is what allows us to do that.
So let epsilon be positive.
Since the f n's
converge to f uniformly,
there exists a
natural number M so
that for all n bigger than or
equal to M, for all y in S,
f M of y minus f of y is
less than epsilon over 3.
Now, this f sub capital M--
I'm just going to fix
that so it should be n.
But now, this is for all n
bigger than or equal to capital
M. I really just need one, so
let's look at the f sub capital
M. That's a continuous function.
Since f sub capital
M is continuous,
there exists a delta positive
so that for all x minus, if x
is within distance
delta to c, then
I get that f sub M of x minus f
sub M of c is less than epsilon
over 3.
So then this delta
here-- so I stopped
doing something
which I was doing
in all previous lectures, when I
would say there exists delta 0.
Choose delta to be this delta 0.
There exists M0.
Choose M to be this M0.
Now I've dropped
that and stopped
doing that because it should
be clear from the context
now what I'm
choosing delta to be.
So then for all x minus
c less than delta--
so I'm saying that I'm now
choosing this delta that
came from here, which came from
f sub capital M. Capital M came
from this, what I needed here.
So now, if I look f of x minus
f of c, which I want to show
is less than epsilon,
now if I add and subtract
f sub M of x and f sub M
of c and use the triangle
inequality, this is
less than or equal to f
of x minus f sub M of x plus f
sub M of x minus f sub M of c
plus f sub M of c minus f of c.
So I just added and subtracted
f sub M of x and f of M of c,
and then used the
triangle inequality.
Now, by this estimate
here, since I'm
looking at a particular
n basically equal to M,
I have this is less
than epsilon over 3
no matter what y is in this set.
So then certainly for x, I will
have this is less than epsilon
over 3.
How I chose delta,
remember, was to guarantee
that this would be less
than epsilon over 3
as long as x minus c
is less than delta.
And then of course,
this one is less than
epsilon over 3 again because of
this uniform closeness of f M
to f.
And therefore, for
all absolute value
of x minus c less
than delta, I have
f of x minus f of c
is less than epsilon.
And that finishes the proof.
So if we have uniform
convergence, then--
a good theorem
should be able to be
stated in one sentence, or at
least some simple and easy way
to remember it.
What this says is the uniform
limit of continuous functions
is continuous.
So the uniform limit
of continuous functions
is continuous.
Next, we'll show, in a
sense, the uniform limit
of differentiable
functions is continuous.
We're going to do the
simplest statement of that,
although one can make
stronger statements.
But in practice, this one
suffices, really, at least
where it pops up later in life.
But before I get to that
one, let's do 3, which is--
let's see, what would be the
short way of saying that?
The integral of
the uniform limit
is the limit of the integrals,
something like that.
That would be the
short and sweet way
of stating the following
theorem, which is--
so this is an answer to 3.
So we skipped over
2 for a minute.
Suppose f n is a sequence of
continuous functions on a, b,
because we're going to be
talking about integrals
and we've only spoken
about integrals
for continuous functions--
suppose f n is a continuous
function on a, b, f from a, b
to R, and f n converges
to F uniformly.
Note that by what we just
proven the previous theorem,
this automatically
guarantees that f
is a continuous function.
So we can ask about
the relationship
between the integral
of f and the limit
of the integrals of f n.
Then the limit as
n goes to infinity,
integral from a to b of
f n equals the integral
from a, b to f.
So the integral of
the uniform limit
is the limit of the integrals.
So this is just a
sequence of numbers,
and we want to show it
converges to this number here.
So let's do this the
old-fashioned way.
Let epsilon be positive.
Since f n converges
to f uniformly,
there exists a natural
number M such that
for all n bigger than or
equal to M, for all x in a,
b, f n of x minus f of
x is less than epsilon.
Now, basically what
we're going to do
is integrate this inequality.
And remember, unlike
differentiation, integration
respects inequalities.
And for all n bigger
than or equal to M,
meaning I'm choosing my
M as this guy for proving
this limit, if I look at
the integral from a, b of f
n minus the integral
of a, b to f,
this is, by linearity
of the integral,
the integral of f n
minus f, absolute value.
By the triangle inequality for
integrals, which we proved,
this is less than or equal
to the integral from a,
b of f n minus f.
And what do we know for all
n bigger than or equal to M?
This function here, f n of x
minus f of x in absolute value,
is bounded by epsilon.
And therefore, the
integral of this side
is going to be less than the
integral of the right side.
So I did this wrong.
Let's put a b minus a over this.
So this is less than integral
a, b epsilon over b minus a.
And so then I just
pick up this number
times the length of the
interval, which equals epsilon.
So for all n bigger
than or equal to M,
the absolute value
of this integral
of f sub n minus the integral
of f is less than epsilon.
So the integral of
the uniform limit
is the limit of the integrals.
So now we'll use this to do
the last interchange of limits
theorem that I had
in mind, so number 2.
And again, this is kind of the
simplest statement, and maybe
easiest to prove,
that one can make.
One can make stronger
statements and prove them,
but in most cases,
this suffices.
So suppose f in a, b to
R. So this is continuously
differentiable for
all n, f and g--
these are two functions
from a, b to R--
and f n converges to f uniformly
on a, b, and the derivatives
converge uniformly
to this function g.
And in fact, I don't
even need this.
We just say pointwise.
So I only need uniform
convergence of the derivatives
if I'm assuming everything is
continuously differentiable,
if I'm assuming the
sequences are continuously
differentiable.
Then f is
differentiable, in fact,
continuously
differentiable, meaning
the derivative is continuous.
And the derivative
of f is equal to g,
meaning that the uniform
limit of the derivatives
converges to the
derivative of f.
So again, what this says
is the uniform limit of--
or at least in
essence and spirit,
it's not exactly what it says--
but it says the uniform limit
of continuously differentiable
functions is differentiable,
and that the derivative of the
uniform limit is the limit of--
the derivative of
the uniform limit
is the uniform limit
of the derivatives.
So to prove this, we use
the fundamental theorem
of calculus.
So let x be a point in a, b.
Then by the fundamental
theorem of calculus,
if I take f n of
x minus f n of a,
this is equal to the integral
from a to x of f n prime.
The integral of the derivative
gives me back the function
evaluated at the endpoints.
And therefore, since I
pointwise convergence,
these two numbers converge
pointwise to f of x and f
of a respectively.
So f of x minus f of
a equals the limit
as n goes to infinity of
f n of x minus f n of a.
And this is equal to, just by
the previous expression, limit
as n goes to infinity
of the integral from a
to x of f n prime.
Now, these f n primes are
converging to g, this function
g, uniformly.
And therefore, the
integrals converge.
that's what we just proved.
So this equals the
integral of the limit.
And therefore-- so we started
off with f of x minus f of a,
and we showed it's equal to
the integral from a to x of g.
So f of x equals f of a plus
But no, again by the
fundamental theorem of calculus,
this implies that f
is differentiable.
And the derivative of f
of x, the derivative of f,
is equal to the
derivative-- so remember,
f of a, that's just a
constant-- equals the derivative
of this function, which is g.
I think we have just
enough time to prove
one more pretty good theorem.
Pretty good-- it's very good.
And then we'll use it
in our next lecture
to discuss, or at
least conclude,
some answers that we originally
asked about power series.
So this theorem is due to
the godfather, Weierstrass.
I don't know, did I refer to
him as godfather or Riemann
as the godfather?
Anyway, I think
it was Weierstrass
that I refer to
as the godfather.
He proved the
following theorem--
when can you guarantee
uniform convergence
for at least a
series of functions,
which are limits of partial
sums, so limits of functions?
And he proved this basically
so he could come up
with a whole host of examples
of continuous functions
which are nowhere
differentiable.
We kind of gave a
proof of this theorem
when we looked at
that example, when
we were talking about
differentiability,
but we didn't state
it as a theorem there.
So let's take a sequence of
functions f j from S to R,
and suppose there exists a
sequence M j such that two
things hold.
So these are a sequence
of positive numbers.
I don't know why I
just erased that, but--
so we have a sequence
of functions from S to R
and a sequence of positive
numbers so that these numbers
dominate the f j's.
And 2, they're
summable, so sum from j
equals 1 to infinity,
which is convergent.
Then the conclusion-- and
since I've been using numbers
for conclusions and
letters for hypotheses,
let's go back to that--
then we have two conclusions.
The first one is pretty obvious.
For all x in S, this
series where I just
take x and stick it into f sub
j, this converges absolutely.
And the second is if I
define, now, the function
to be the sum of these series,
then the partial sums converge
to f uniformly--
converges to f uniformly
as n goes to infinity on S.
So if I have a
sequence of functions,
each one bounded by some number
of M sub j, positive number--
or not negative
number, at least--
and the series involving the
M sub j's is convergent, then
the series of the f sub
j's converges uniformly.
That's the conclusion.
So in our example of
that continuous, nowhere
differentiable functions,
each of these f sub j's
were cosine of 160j
x over 4 to the j.
So before we prove
this theorem, we
can combine all
of what we've done
so far to state the following--
the function f of x equals sum
from j equals 1 to infinity,
and I could make
it something else,
but let's say sine of 40k over
2 to the k x is continuous on,
let's say, 0, 1 for now.
I could say on R.
Why is that?
Each of these f sub--
I'm really butchering
this trying to go fast.
This is 2 to the j, not 2.
Each of these functions is
bounded by 1 over 2 to the j,
and 1 over 2 to
the j is summable.
So then by this theorem,
this convergence,
so this function here,
is the uniform limit
of the partial sums.
The partial sums are just a
finite sum involving sine,
so they're continuous functions.
So f is the uniform limit
of continuous functions,
and is, therefore, continuous.
So we could have
used this theorem
to prove that function we looked
at back in differentiability
was continuous,
but we didn't have
uniform convergence
and all that back then.
So we just proved it by hand.
But using this, this
theorem gives you
a big class of sequences
of functions which converge
uniformly to some function.
So let's prove this quickly.
So one follows from
the assumption a, b,
and the comparison test.
If I take an x in S f sub j
of x is bounded by M sub j,
and M sub j is summable,
this series converges.
So by the comparison
test, the sum,
with absolute values here
for each fixed x, converges.
And that's absolute convergence.
Now, let's show that the
partial sums converge
to the limit uniformly.
So let epsilon be positive.
Since this sum converges,
there exists an M,
a natural number
so this-- remember,
we have this Cauchy
criterion for--
well, I guess we
don't have to have--
so that sum from n equals
M plus 1 to infinity of M
sub j, so j, which is equal to--
I chose a poor letter.
So this M here should not--
let's change this to an N.
So this is less than epsilon.
So the point is that
the tail is small.
The sum from j equals n plus
1 to infinity of M sub j
is less than epsilon.
And for all n bigger than
or equal to this capital N,
for all x in S, if I
look at the limit, which
is f of x, this is sum of
the series minus sum from j
equals 1 to n,
this is equal to--
now, f of x is equal
to the whole sum,
so minus this
first part, this is
equal to sum from
j equals n plus 1
to infinity of f of j of x.
And by the triangle
inequality, which
does hold for a
convergent series,
this is less than or
equal to sum from j
equals n plus 1 to
infinity of f sub j of x.
And by assumption
a, this is less than
or equal to sum from j equals n
plus 1 to infinity of M sub j.
And since n is bigger than
or equal to capital N,
I have this is
less than or equal
to sum from j equals capital N
plus 1 to infinity of M sub j.
And this thing,
we chose capital N
so that that's
less than epsilon.
And that's the end.
So again, this n was chosen
depending only on the series.
It didn't depend
on any x at any--
it didn't depend on
the point x in S.
So I had to go through
that kind of quickly
because I'm up against
the time crunch.
But the point is,
for this theorem,
is that if I have a sequence
of functions that are bounded
by these numbers M sub j--
I was going so fast I didn't
even label it correctly--
this is called the
Weierstrass M test,
M because you see M here--
if I have a sequence
of functions bounded
by some numbers M sub j, And
those M sub j's are summable,
then what it says is that
the series of the functions
converges uniformly.
So we'll stop there.